as a 4-day ceasefire takes hold in Gaza
talk of a two-state solution is once
again reemerging among the International
Community but given the level of
violence in the past 7 weeks across the
occupied territories is now the time to
pursue this path to a lasting peace and
what would it take from both sides to
secure it this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello there I'm James Bay 47 days of air
strikes on the Gaza Strip nearly 15,000
Palestinians killed 1,200 Israelis dead
ongoing raids and arrests by the Israeli
Army in the occupied West Bank and add
to that Israeli settler attacks on
Palestinian communities is now really
the best time to restart discussion
surrounding the elusive two-state
solution for Israel and Palestine
international calls have begun to grow
louder to pursue this but what are the
red lines for both sides and what would
a return to 1967 borders look like in
reality we'll explore all these issues
with our panel of guests in a moment but
first this report from ktia Lopez
hodan calls to revive a two-state
solution are reemerging to address the
crisis in Gaza during a visit to the
Rafa border crossing in Egypt Spain's
prime minister Pedro Sanchez urged the
European Union which he currently leads
to make that happen I think that the
momentum Has Come For The International
Community especially for the European
Union and member states to
recognize uh the state of Palestine
Belgium which next year will take over
the rotating EU presidency Echoes that
call the destruction of Gaza is
unacceptable we cannot accept that a
society is being destroyed the way it is
being destroyed Detroit repeated
attempts for a two-state solution have
failed for decades there are several
issues at play including Israel's
illegal settlements land confiscation
and the status of occupied East
Jerusalem which would be the capital of
any future Palestinian State the changes
are notable this map outlines Israeli
and Palestinian territories in
1967 after The Six Day War decades later
this is the new territorial outline
between 1967 and 2022 Israel has built
about 300 illegal settlements in the
occupied West Bank and East Jerusalem
violating international
law the US which is Israel's strongest
supporter is also backing calls for a
two-state solution in a recent statement
President Joe Biden said two states for
two peoples it's more important now than
ever but previous US administrations say
political push back has continuously
blocked this from
happening Hamas is not a partner for any
kind of peace or two- State solution but
the Palestinian Authority might one time
again be new leadership uh in Gaza might
again be so you to get to a point where
that's possible seven weeks into the war
on Gaza calls for a two-state solution
are growing louder well beyond the
Middle East with supporters insisting
it's the best option to ensure security
and dignity for both Israelis and
Palestinians Kia Lopez oan for insight
[Music]
story well let's discuss all of this
further by bringing in our panel of
guests in Tel Aviv Alan leel a former
director general of the Israeli foreign
Ministry and a former Israeli ambassador
to South Africa he's also part of an
Israeli campaign to advance recognition
of a Palestinian state by other
governments in Washington DC Phyllis Ben
a fellow at The Institute for policy
studies an international adviser to
Jewish voice for peace and author of
understanding the Palestinian Israeli
conflict a primer and in rala Mustafa
bakui Secretary General of the
Palestinian national initiative and a
former information Minister for the
Palestinian Authority thank you all of
us all of you for joining us today to
discuss a two-state solution now this is
an idea that clearly isn't new it's been
around since before uh the formation of
the state of Israel with the un
Palestine partition plan although that
also in addition to having an Arab and
Jewish state was going to have an
international City for Jerusalem U let
me start by getting your basic view
before we discuss this in in detail um
do you think that a two-state solution
is
desirable and viable Mustafa let's start
with
you well it was desirable and it was
viable but Israel killed it Netanyahu in
particular came to power with one goal
to kill the possibility of two-state
solution and he managed to do so in two
ways first of all he obstructed any
possible
negotiations and second he expanded
settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories specifically in Gaz in West
Bank to a level that makes the two-state
solution
impossible in the process they've
created a one new reality a one
apartheid state reality
uh pushing Palestinians to start to
think that the only alternative to one
apartheid state is one Democratic state
with equal rights now Netanyahu is
coming with the second plan with his
fascist crowd in his government like
smotrich and Bing and their goal now is
to solve the demographic problem where
the number of Palestinians is equal if
not a little bit more than Jewish
Israelis on the land of historic
Palestine by trying to impose ethnic
cleansing he wants to start with Gaza
evicting 2.3 million people out of Gaza
and this is the real purpose of this
horrible attack on Gaza and then he's
trying he will be moving to the West
Bank this is the exact reality of today
okay if you want to
speak will we'll bring you back we'll
bring you back in in a bit Mustafa let's
get alon's take of this uh do you think
it is viable now a two-state solution do
you think it's desirable the current
circumstances I certainly think it's
desirable I am a two Stater from my
early adult
years I always belied this is the best
solution to the Israeli Palestinian
conflict and with what happened over the
years on the 6th of October I was among
those believing that this dream is
gone that it's not possible
anymore and not only because of the
number of settlers but also because the
Israeli government in the last decade
dropped the idea officially dropped the
idea and in every Coalition agreement we
had until 10 years ago the two- State
solution was a goal of the Coalition
about 10 years ago it was removed so we
were very disillusion we we really
believed it's not possible anymore and
when you ask me today I think the idea
is back on the table okay okay we'll
come we'll come to you again in a minute
Phyllis your take
please well first I would say that I
think on the question of
viability that there is no land left for
a Palestinian State whether or not we'd
like it I think it's just not realistic
unless we're talking about removing
somewhere close to
800,000 illegal Israeli settlers on that
land which I don't think is on anyone's
agenda number two I think that we have
to be clear that the kind of state quote
that was being talked about for the
Palestinians was never really a
Palestinian state it would be an entity
that lacked control of its own bard
orders of its own water of its own
airspace its electrical grid
self-defense it was not designed ever it
was never discussed as something that
would truly be an equal state with the
state of Israel and third my only point
is I'm an American I'm a Jewish girl
from California I don't think I have any
right to say whether it's a good thing
or a bad thing that's for people who
live in that land Palestinians and
Israelis to decide and the notion that
my president or me as a taxpayer should
have some right to choose as opposed to
saying what we want is equality if it's
one state equality for all within the
one state if it's two states equality
within both States and between both
States but I think as I said as an
analyst I don't think it's viable any
longer because there is simply no land
left okay Mustafa my day job when I'm
not here in Doha which I am at the
moment is based at the UN in New York
for Al jazer and I watch the security
council meeting that happens every
single month on the Middle East and the
situation regarding Israel and Palestine
and every single month I listen to all
15 members of the security Council talk
and mention a two-state solution it's
rather like a mantra but no one ever
talks about the steps to make it happen
do you think the talk now we're hearing
for example from the the Spanish prime
minister and the Belgian prime minister
Minister do you think it's actually
changed or do you think they're just
saying it because they have nothing else
to
say no there is change and the change is
specifically because the heroism and the
steadfastness of the Palestinian people
especially in Gaza but all over
Palestine have defeated the Israeli
Netanyahu plan to eliminate the
Palestinian question and liquidate
through normalization with Arab
countries as he was planning to so the
pales issue is back on the table nobody
can avoid
it unfortunately it has to be a
situation where Israelis are hurt before
the world starts to see the reality of
Palestine uh there were many many better
ways to look at the problem during the
last 30 years but the world turned there
back to us and especially the United
States of America and Western Europe the
talk about two-state solution became a
title of hypocrisy it be became a
cliche that they would mention just to
avoid dealing with the problem it's
became just a slogan but in reality
nobody worked for it if anybody really
meant it they would have
initiated real sanctions plans on Israel
for continuing settlement activities
which all these countries including the
United States of America admitted was a
violation of international law and
admitted it would kill the possibility
of two State solution so Israel was
allowed to increase the number of
settlers from 121,000 to more than
750,000 today and they became a major
political power inside Israel producing
such fascist like smri and Bing becoming
actually the real governors of the West
Bank now if the world wants I mean the
the options are three there are no other
options either one Democratic state with
equal rights which I prefer for
everybody but it would not be a Jewish
only state it cannot be one Democratic
state of Israel wants to maintain this
nation state law which says that
self-determination in a it's Israel
meaning all of Palestine is for Jewish
people only it has to be fully
Democratic and fully equal which means
equal National and civil rights if
that's not what they want and they want
two-state solution there are two
conditions one the complete evacuation
of all settlers from the West Bank and
second negotiations will not be about
what will happen but will be about
implementing a particular end result
which everybody would agree about which
is that the end of the process is the
creation of a Palestinian State the end
of Israeli occupation of all occupied
territories in
1967 and that the borders are not for
discussion the borders are the borders
of the 4th of junee 1967 including East
Jerusalem if these conditions to these
two conditions are there there can be a
Palestinian state but without these two
conditions the talk about two states
becomes only one way of avoiding the
problem this is my opinion Al Alan Alan
if I can bring you in on this you just
heard Mustafa say that up until now the
International Community the two- State
solution had become just a slogan would
you agree with that and do you think
they're serious right
now I think there is a
difference between
2014 and today I think that until
2014 ER countries ER and especially the
most relevant ones that are interested
in this conflict including the United
States and the the European countries
really believed the idea is feasible it
doesn't mean that they adopted it on the
governmental level or put pressure on
Israel to implement it but I remember
and I was part of it in the last three
months of
2014 one Parliament after the other in
Western Europe adopted a
resolution to call upon the government
to recognize a Palestinian State I think
at this stage they really believe in it
what happened there were several things
the first time the first one of them was
Isis the major Terror attacks of Isis
starting in January
2015 and the big March in Paris and so
changed the mood ER in the Palestinian
in the Western World on Islam and as a
result of it also on the Hamas and the
Palestinian issue and there was less
Readiness in Europe when the focus was
on Isis to discuss a Palestinian State
parallel to it and I agree what was said
the Israeli government understood the
the world is not pushing putting
pressure and removed the issue and it
was not a a policy of Israel anymore so
the the fact that in the last decade the
world kind of dropped the idea
definitely didn't put pressure on Israel
and the Israeli government dropped the
idea caused the situation that prior to
this war it was not an issue let me
bring phis in on that point because when
I say sit listening to those un Security
Council meetings I listen to the 15
people 15 um members talk about a
two-state solution I listen to the
Palestinian delegate talk about
two-state solution and you never hear
the words coming from an Israeli sitting
in the security Council for literally
years in fact um I tried in the last
year to um to address Ambassador gilad
Adan the Israeli Ambassador on this I
said do you simple question does your
government believe in a two-state
solution he walked off I mean is Israel
doesn't believe in this does
it Israel certainly does not believe in
it but I think this is not something new
and we'll come to you in a second
Mustafa we'll come to you in a second
Mustafa Phyllis please okay okay thank
you okay I think that it's certainly
true that the current Israeli government
has been far more explicit in its
rejection of a two-state solution
earlier Israeli governments talked about
it talked around it none of them ever
acknowledged the realities is that
Mustafa so clearly laid out a few
minutes ago the notion that there would
have to be the removal of uh all
settlers or the agreement of all current
settlers to become Palestinian set C
citizens sorry Palestinian citizens with
no special privileges no special
protection no arms against their own
government they would have to be
citizens like everyone else which would
make it essentially two equal citizens
equal citizenships in two different
countries uh but no one is talking about
that as a model the models always
included the idea that Israel would be
the dominant power and what we're
hearing now is a much more explicit call
for accepting the reality of the Israeli
legal system which so many in the world
now identify as an apartheid system
partly because of the laws that have
been passed explicit laws that mandate
discrimination against non-jews the most
recent one the one that Mustafa referred
to the nation state law which is
essentially the equivalent in the United
States of a constitutional amendment
that says
explicitly that the right of
selfdetermination in the land of Israel
meaning all of the land of historic
Palestine belongs only to Jews that's a
very clear understanding of who is to
have power and who will have the choice
as one
Israeli leader outlined very explicitly
the choice will be either Palestinians
leave ethnic cleansing as we're now
seeing the effort to force people out or
they will agree to live under the
suppression of a dominant population
that of Jews and Jewish Jewish power
over Palestinians or they will die okay
let me let me bring let Mustafa was very
keen to say something Mustafa let me
bring you in
no I was going to say something similar
actually no Israeli government before
even the government of itak Rabin agreed
on a Palestinian State all they have
been talking about is some kind of
self-governing authority they differ
about the size of the land that will be
under this self-governing Authority
about the amount of Natural Resources
they will be in control of but all
Israeli governments without exception up
to now we didn't see that government
that would agree with a Palestinian
independent state meaning that a state
would have sovereignity would have
control over its borders would have
security control of its airspace of its
electromagnetic field Etc and even that
formula of
self-governing structure that could be
called a state or whatever you call it
Empire maybe even that Netanyahu did not
accept okay and that's why Netanyahu
made it the goal of his life not only to
aggravate the public tillak Rin was
assassinated by an Israeli extremist but
to kill the very idea that Palestinians
would have any form of
self-determination okay let me let me
for a moment pause for a moment let me
read you a quote uh this was when um the
issue of settlements as often as it been
at the top of the agenda it's a quote
from the former un Secretary General
bang kimoon uh he said let me read you
the parties must act and act now to
prevent the two- State solution from
slipping away forever unfolding and
implementing this Vision two states
living side by side in peace and
Security offers the only means by which
Israel could retain its Jewish majority
and Democratic status that was in 2016
it was slipping away forever that was
before the Trump Administration and a
massive expansion of settlements being
built um what do you say Alon to people
who say there's absolutely no way now
it's already dead it's an apartate State
how do you dismantle settlements that
have more than 70 700,000 settlers
living in
them first I was part of the Rabin
government so I know
exactly who were the people and I know
exactly why Rabin was
assassinated we wanted a Palestinian
State and it cost Rabin his life as you
know I think we are missing two words in
this discussion one the will and the
will of the
leadership when you have a leadership
that doesn't want a Palestinian State
you will not have a Palestinian state
but we are speaking on a different
leadership we are speaking after this
war there might be there will possibly
be a different Israeli leadership now if
the new Israeli leadership will come
back to the two states idea it can
happen now another important word that
we miss is the swap of land all previous
discussions on a Palestinian state with
Arafat with Abu maen always spoke on a
swap of land not on the removal of all
settlers and the number of settlers here
were exaggerated I don't know about the
higher number at least in the West Bank
than half a million but the the swap was
the key and we agreed on the first stage
to a 3% SW then in the Abu ma talks it
was about 5 six% it can be maybe more
now but with the swap it is possible and
I think now those of us who want two
states have to promote the idea of a
swap to explain the idea of a swap of
land because without a swap I agree it
cannot work okay well among those
talking about a two-state solution in
recent in in a moment Mustafa one of
those talking about a two-state solution
uh in recent hours has been President
Biden a two-state solution where
Israelis and Palestinians can one day
live side by side with equal measure of
freedom and dignity but it does I mean
it's all very well saying a two-state
solution but it does matter what you
mean by a two-state solution we look at
the Trump Administration uh Jared
Kushner came up with something that um
uh that president abas said look like a
a Swiss cheese um if you look at the
un's definition um it it says Phyllis a
vision of two states Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace
and security that bits the same as Biden
but on the basis of the pre-1967 lines
with Jerusalem as the capital of both
States do you think the US support that
bit of the statement absolutely not
absolutely not because that implies
number one that there would be real
sovereignty for a Palestinian State no
one is talking ever not since the Madrid
Conference of 1991 not since Oslo and
not today no one in power in Western
capitals particularly in my capital is
talking about a truly Sovereign
Palestinian state with control of all
the things that make up sovereignty
they're talking about an entity there
was an extraordinary moment on this show
about two weeks ago I was on uh on
discussing another aspect of the of the
Gaza crisis and there was someone on it
I've been trying to remember his name
and unfortunately I don't but he was a
he's a a um an activist in the
Democratic Party in the US from Jewish
Democrats a great supporter of Israel
and a supporter of a version of the
two-state solution and he said
of course the settlements I had raised
something about the settlers as a
serious problem in the notion of two
states and he said of course the
settlers would have to be removed and
Israel has shown and this was the
extraordinary thing he said Israel has
shown now in Gaza that it could move a
million people in a very short time so
clearly it could do that with the
settlers and unfortunately it was the
last moment of the show and I didn't get
the chance to follow up with a question
to him are you saying that you're
proposing that Israel should be bombing
this 750 to
800,000 settlers across the West Bank
and killing thousands of them because
that's what it took for Israel to force
people in Gaza to move from the northern
part of the Gaza Strip to the southern
part what killing
them the problem with this show we get
to the end and we we we we can't say
everything so I'd like to go to Mustafa
on the US Point Mustafa um he's talking
about a two-state solution do
Palestinians think the US is an honest
broker given its strong support for
Israel in this war that's now killed
about 15,000 people in
Gaza no the United States Administration
is not uh cannot play that role because
it has become a partner in the crime in
what's going on in Gaza and that that
doesn't make it capable of being a
mediator and what we need is something
different but in response to what was
said about the Swap and all other
projects like Yos ban project of
Confederation they're all designed to
accommodate settlement building to
accommodate an illegal action of
settlements what Israelis don't realize
and don't
understand that the what they have done
in Gaza now the back the ACT of ethnic
cleansing of 1.5 million people from the
north and center of Gaza brought this
whole question to its roots which is
that Israel was created as a settler
Colonial project ethnically cleansing
70% of the Palestinian people the
message that we get now as all
Palestinians in the West Bank in Gaza
and even inside Israel itself is that
these guys only want one solution which
is to ethnically cleanse all of us and
we will not allow that and we will
struggle for our freedom and we will get
our freedom they don't want two states
fine but they will not cheat us with a
ploy of something that is uh nothing but
a Subs servant structure for Israeli
occupation Mustafa thank you very much
and thanks to all our guests Alan leel
phis Bennis and Mustafa bouti Al jazer
continues to cover the war in Gaza and
the region around the clock for more
analysis and context text I'd recommend
going to our website al.com and if you
have views about all of this we'd like
you to express them go to our Facebook
page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory or on X the
one we used to call Twitter you'll find
us AJ insid story from me James Bay and
the team here in Doha please stay safe
bye-bye for
[Music]
now